README.md, before:

# single-position-H3N2-histogram

Python pipeline for automated generation of publication-quality H3N2 HA amino-acid position figures. These scripts are intended for use with chatGPT to generate histograms for figures using the chatGPT5.2 project context feature.

---

# H3N2 Figure Generation Scripts (Reviewer Package)

This repository contains the original manuscript-level scripts used to generate automated H3N2 HA position figures and slide decks.

## Included Scripts

- `render_single_position_histogram_adaptive_COLORLOCKED_v2.py`
- `render_ha_single_position_figures.py`
- `build_histogram_ha_deck_ORDERED_ALIGNED.py`

## Example Outputs

- `Example output position 82.svg`
- `Example output position 83.svg`

No experimental datasets are included.

---

# 1) Single-Position Histogram Renderer

**File**
```
render_single_position_histogram_adaptive_COLORLOCKED_v2.py
```

## Purpose

Generates a complete publication-style multi-panel figure for a single HA amino-acid position.

**Output formats**
- SVG (default, vector)
- PNG (optional)
- Transparent background

---

## Figure Structure (Top → Bottom)

### 1. Stacked Amino-Acid Histogram

- Year range: 1965–2020 (locked)
- Y-axis: Proportion (0–1.0, fixed 0.25 increments)
- Deterministic amino-acid color map (frozen)
- “Other” category automatically collapsed
- Legend titled **Amino Acid**
- Publication-aligned margins

### 2. Antigenic Cluster Strip

Clusters:

HK68 → EN72 → VI75 → TX77 → BK79 → SI87 → BE89 → BE92 → WU95 → SY97 → FU02 → CA04 → WI05 → PE09 → TX12 → HK14

- Horizontally aligned to histogram bins
- Deterministic `tab20` colormap
- Black borders
- Two-digit cluster labels

### 3. Neutralization Matrix

- Rows: mAbs associated with that position
- Columns: Antigenic clusters
- Cell color derived from Excel fill color
- Mutation letters rendered (WT → mutant across cluster boundary)
- Negative mAb IDs treated as equivalent to positive (e.g., `-117 == 117`)
- Adaptive height scaling
- If no mAbs are present: panel collapses with message

### 4. Year Axis Strip

- Tick marks every 5 years
- Vertical year labels
- Bold axis label “Year”
- Locked placement (no stretching)

---

## Required Inputs

User must provide:

- Histogram proportion XLSX  
- Neutralization matrix XLSX  
- Amino-acid mutation table XLSX  
- JSON mapping (position → mAbs)

No data files are bundled in this repository.

---

## Command Example

```bash
python render_single_position_histogram_adaptive_COLORLOCKED_v2.py \
  --position 82 \
  --out position_82.svg \
  --fmt svg \
  --hist_xlsx hist_data.xlsx \
  --neut_xlsx neutralization.xlsx \
  --aa_positions_xlsx aa_positions.xlsx \
  --mapping_json position_mab_map.json
```

---

# 2) HA Head Renderer (Structural Panel)

**File**
```
render_ha_single_position_figures.py
```

## Purpose

Generates HA-head structural PNG renders (single residue highlighted) for integration with histogram slides.

Designed for:

- Transparent background
- Fixed camera angle
- Deterministic coloring
- Compatible sizing for deck builder script

**Output**
```
position_<X>_HA.png
```

---

# 3) PowerPoint Deck Builder

**File**
```
build_histogram_ha_deck_ORDERED_ALIGNED.py
```

## Purpose

Builds a slide deck where each slide contains:

**Left panel**
- Histogram (SVG converted internally to PNG)

**Right panel**
- HA-head PNG render

---

## Slide Layout Rules (Locked)

**Histogram**
- Width: 7.5 inches
- Flush left
- Height auto-scaled proportionally

**HA-head**
- Width: 3.0 inches
- Flush right
- Vertically centered

Slides:
- Ordered descending by numeric position
- Negative IDs treated as positive
- Deterministic alignment

---

## Required Inputs

- ZIP file of histogram SVGs  
- ZIP file of HA-head PNGs  

**Output**
```
Histogram_HA_deck.pptx
```

---

# Reproducibility

Figures are deterministic given:

- Locked year range (1965–2020)
- Frozen amino-acid color map
- Fixed cluster definitions
- Explicit layout constants (inches)
- Neutralization height scaling derived from canonical reference (position 225)

Identical inputs will produce identical figures.

---

# Data Policy

This repository contains **code only**.

No:
- IC50 data
- Raw neutralization tables
- Sequence datasets
- Manuscript figures
- Unpublished results

All experimental data must be supplied locally by the user.

Commit message:

Update README with usage instructions for ChatGPT
Added instructions for using scripts in a ChatGPT Project workspace.

README.md, after:

# single-position-H3N2-histogram

Python pipeline for automated generation of publication-quality H3N2 HA amino-acid position figures. These scripts are intended for use with chatGPT to generate histograms for figures using the chatGPT5.2 project context feature.


## Using These Scripts in a ChatGPT Project

To use these scripts within a ChatGPT Project workspace, upload the `.py` files directly into the Project’s “Files” section (Project → Files → Upload). Once uploaded, they become part of the persistent project context and can be referenced for code execution, modification, or figure generation within that workspace. After uploading, ensure all required input files (XLSX + JSON mapping) are also added to the Project files so the renderer can access them during execution.

---

# H3N2 Figure Generation Scripts (Reviewer Package)

This repository contains the original manuscript-level scripts used to generate automated H3N2 HA position figures and slide decks.

## Included Scripts

- `render_single_position_histogram_adaptive_COLORLOCKED_v2.py`
- `render_ha_single_position_figures.py`
- `build_histogram_ha_deck_ORDERED_ALIGNED.py`

## Example Outputs

- `Example output position 82.svg`
- `Example output position 83.svg`

No experimental datasets are included.

---

# 1) Single-Position Histogram Renderer

**File**
```
render_single_position_histogram_adaptive_COLORLOCKED_v2.py
```

## Purpose

Generates a complete publication-style multi-panel figure for a single HA amino-acid position.

**Output formats**
- SVG (default, vector)
- PNG (optional)
- Transparent background

---

## Figure Structure (Top → Bottom)

### 1. Stacked Amino-Acid Histogram

- Year range: 1965–2020 (locked)
- Y-axis: Proportion (0–1.0, fixed 0.25 increments)
- Deterministic amino-acid color map (frozen)
- “Other” category automatically collapsed
- Legend titled **Amino Acid**
- Publication-aligned margins

### 2. Antigenic Cluster Strip

Clusters:

HK68 → EN72 → VI75 → TX77 → BK79 → SI87 → BE89 → BE92 → WU95 → SY97 → FU02 → CA04 → WI05 → PE09 → TX12 → HK14

- Horizontally aligned to histogram bins
- Deterministic `tab20` colormap
- Black borders
- Two-digit cluster labels

### 3. Neutralization Matrix

- Rows: mAbs associated with that position
- Columns: Antigenic clusters
- Cell color derived from Excel fill color
- Mutation letters rendered (WT → mutant across cluster boundary)
- Negative mAb IDs treated as equivalent to positive (e.g., `-117 == 117`)
- Adaptive height scaling
- If no mAbs are present: panel collapses with message

### 4. Year Axis Strip

- Tick marks every 5 years
- Vertical year labels
- Bold axis label “Year”
- Locked placement (no stretching)

---

## Required Inputs

User must provide:

- Histogram proportion XLSX  
- Neutralization matrix XLSX  
- Amino-acid mutation table XLSX  
- JSON mapping (position → mAbs)

No data files are bundled in this repository.

---

## Command Example

```bash
python render_single_position_histogram_adaptive_COLORLOCKED_v2.py \
  --position 82 \
  --out position_82.svg \
  --fmt svg \
  --hist_xlsx hist_data.xlsx \
  --neut_xlsx neutralization.xlsx \
  --aa_positions_xlsx aa_positions.xlsx \
  --mapping_json position_mab_map.json
```

---

# 2) HA Head Renderer (Structural Panel)

**File**
```
render_ha_single_position_figures.py
```

## Purpose

Generates HA-head structural PNG renders (single residue highlighted) for integration with histogram slides.

Designed for:

- Transparent background
- Fixed camera angle
- Deterministic coloring
- Compatible sizing for deck builder script

**Output**
```
position_<X>_HA.png
```

---

# 3) PowerPoint Deck Builder

**File**
```
build_histogram_ha_deck_ORDERED_ALIGNED.py
```

## Purpose

Builds a slide deck where each slide contains:

**Left panel**
- Histogram (SVG converted internally to PNG)

**Right panel**
- HA-head PNG render

---

## Slide Layout Rules (Locked)

**Histogram**
- Width: 7.5 inches
- Flush left
- Height auto-scaled proportionally

**HA-head**
- Width: 3.0 inches
- Flush right
- Vertically centered

Slides:
- Ordered descending by numeric position
- Negative IDs treated as positive
- Deterministic alignment

---

## Required Inputs

- ZIP file of histogram SVGs  
- ZIP file of HA-head PNGs  

**Output**
```
Histogram_HA_deck.pptx
```

---

# Reproducibility

Figures are deterministic given:

- Locked year range (1965–2020)
- Frozen amino-acid color map
- Fixed cluster definitions
- Explicit layout constants (inches)
- Neutralization height scaling derived from canonical reference (position 225)

Identical inputs will produce identical figures.

---

# Data Policy

This repository contains **code only**.

No:
- IC50 data
- Raw neutralization tables
- Sequence datasets
- Manuscript figures
- Unpublished results

All experimental data must be supplied locally by the user.
